THE CRUISE OF A SOUL
(A Phantasy)
Read at Colby Academy

A bark its anchor weighed one day,
Unfurled its sails and stood away.

The ocean grand stretched out in view,
The coast each moment fainter grew.

Upon its deck paced to and fro,
A soul, thus musing soft and low.

"Farewell, dear home, thy quiet joy,
Thy mother love hath no allow.

"Thy fields of green slope to the sea,
Thy mountain tops look down on me.

"Farewell, the past, the future's near;
Along her coast my bark I steer."

On sped the bark for many a day,
Along old ocean's trackless way.

One eve (the full moon from its height
Trailed on the sea its track of light)--

An island burst upon the view
And nearer, nearer, larger grew.

Fair cities nestled by its shore,
Each hill its castled helmet wore.

Its plains were clad in robes of green,
Its rivers flowed tall elms between.

While music wafted on the ear
Rose soft as that the angels hear.

Ablaze with light as they could be,
Tall palaces ope'd to the sea.

Their marble steps the ocean laved,
Fair maids their white armed beckonings waved--

In mazy dances circling round,
Each captive youth by passion bound.

"Ah me!" the soul signed, "I must share
Thy joys, thou isle so bright and fair!"

An angel took the helm just then,
And seaward sailed the bark again.

* * *

Anon a narrow strait appears,
The bark sails on, the coast line nears.

On either hand a harbor wide
Tall vessels shield from wind and tide.

Great cities nestle on the shores
With beckoning hands and open doors.

Where thousand thousands walk the street,
With eager mien and hurrying feet.

Half worlds find here a ready mart
For bent of mind and grace of heart.

And here the work of skillful hands,
And here the fruits of many lands

In crowded mart and thronged stall
Meet whim and need of one and all.

And here the cancerous greed of gold
And lust of ill-got wealth enfold.

Here mammom, like a gilded god,
Enthroned, looks down on common sod.

And place and power stretch magic wands
And pleasure lures with beckoning hands.

The soul, beneath that magic spell,
Cries out at once, "Here will I dwell!"

The angel took the helm again,
Along its course the bark sailed then.

* * *

'Twas night and darkness veiled the shore,
Save when the lightning hurtled o'er.

And on that deck, with bended knee,
And shrinking form, the soul I see.

Ah, soul, what is thy terror now?
What seest thou from thy vessel's prow?

Leeward, a marsh as black as night,
Tall phantoms peopled with afright.

And shrieks from out that miry den,
Rise from the lips of sinking men,

Of such as choose than God's dear light
To walk in superstition's night.

While from the windward side, o'erhead,
Hang beetling crags, a sight more dread.

Where unbelief site throned high,
And hurls defiance at the sky.

Along their faces rough and bare,
The lightnings dart with lurid glare.

While, shaking earth and troubling sea,
The thunders roll their symphony.

The angel at the helm stands fast,
And guides the bark safe through at last.
